### What clauses have been used in contracts for free/libre/open works?

Under a CC-by licensing (CC-by 3.0 or a later version) to the Government of Canada's Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat.

**DISCLAIMER**: The following clauses have been used in contracts issued by TBS
for authoring free/libre/open work. The goal with the text below is to
ensure that both the contractor and the Government of Canada are cleared to
adapt and redistribute the work. The wording here may or may not suit your
circumstances, so please consider your own project's business objectives,
and also check with your legal counsel on the most suitable terms to
achieve those objectives.


### EXAMPLE 1. This text has been used for analytical reports:

Intellectual rights under this contract are managed in conformance with the
TBS Policy on Title to Intellectual Property Arising Under Crown
Procurement Contracts, (Appendix A: Contractor Owns)
http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pol/doc-eng.aspx?id=13697?ion=text#secA.2. The
work created under this contract will be made available under the GNU Free
Documentation License http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html upon payment.


### EXAMPLE 2. This text has been used in the Statements of Work for both analytical and software contracts:

**By signing this Contract, the Contractor**:

Attests that any Foreground Information to be contributed shall be directly
authored by himself or herself, such that he/she holds moral rights of
integrity, association, and attribution for the contributions, and also
holds author?s rights to issue licenses and to assert controls on copying
and distribution of these contributions (copyright).

Waives his/her moral rights of integrity of the work, thereby authorising
anyone else to make derivative works; and, Waives his/her moral rights of
association, which authorises anyone else to combine or distribute the
contributed work in relation to any product, service, cause or institution.

Retains moral right of attribution to the original contributed form of the
work which is the right to claim authorship; to remain anonymous; to use a
pseudonym.

Commits that all contributed Third Party data, information or knowledge
will be accompanied by identification of sources, and documentation of
permissions from those who hold moral rights and authors? rights, which may
be in the form of licenses.

Commits to respect all requirements of Third Party permissions and
licenses, and to ensure that Third Party work will only be contributed if
it is known to be under permissions and licenses that are compatible with
the licences of other intellectual works associated with this assignment.
Accordingly the contractor commits to identify in writing any issues or
uncertainties regarding appropriate use or distribution.

Commits to ensure that the terms and conditions of externally acquired
solutions needed to work with or implement the Foreground Information shall
be read and respected by the contributor and clearly communicated to the
Crown.

Assigns unrestricted, independent, joint authors? rights (copyright) in the
Foreground Information to the Crown in alignment with the TBS 'Policy on
Title to Intellectual Property Arising Under Crown Procurement Contracts'
Appendix A, Part 1, Section 03, Paragraph 2. This means that
notwithstanding the Contractor's ownership of intellectual rights in the
Foreground Information the Crown also obtains unrestricted, independent,
joint authors' rights in the Foreground Information, without limiting the
intellectual rights of the contractor. Under this arrangement, both the
Crown and the Contractor hold full, autonomous rights to distribute,
license and sublicense the contribution. The Contractor as original author
will always be attributed within the provisions of the applicable
license(s). However both Contractor and Crown may independently register a
copyright in the contribution in any jurisdiction. The Contractor and Crown
each hold unrestricted and independent derivative and distribution rights
in the Foreground Information, or any part, including the right to make
these available under any license, for a fee or otherwise, to re-license
and/or sub-license and/or multiple-license, without seeking any additional
authorisations from the counterparty to the Agreement. These rights do not
extend to combined or derivative works involving contributions of Third
Party rights holders except as the Third Party rights holders permit.


### EXAMPLE 3. This text was received from a contractor, as per the assignment clause above.

In regards to the work that FirstName LastName performed in the project
between March 12, 2009 to April 10th, 2009 (commitment # 601XXXX - DC/FC:
1234/5678910) at TBS; CompanyName assigns unrestricted, independent, joint
authors? rights (copyright) in the Foreground Information to the Crown.


### EXAMPLE 4. This text has been used for templates and components intended for implementation in any context:

**Terms and Conditions of Use**

Unless otherwise noted, computer program source code of the ProjectName is
covered under Crown Copyright, Government of Canada, and is distributed
under the MIT License.

The Canada wordmark and related graphics associated with this distribution
are protected under trademark law and copyright law. No permission is
granted to use them outside the parameters of the Government of Canada's
corporate identity program. [For more information](http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/fip-pcim/index-eng.asp).

Copyright title to all 3rd party software distributed with the ProjectName
is held by the respective copyright holders as noted in those files. Users
are asked to read the 3rd Party Licenses referenced with those assets.

Copyright (c) 2011 Government of Canada

**MIT License**

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


### EXAMPLE 5. This text has been used for whole applications where the Crown's business objective is to benefit from the subsequent simplicity of a unified licensing scheme, but also to leave the Contractor full choice as to its own later preferences.

Licensing for Knowledge-Sharing and Inter-Organizational Learning.
To operationalize knowledge-sharing and inter-organizational learning, both
Treasury Board Secretariat and the Contractor are engaging a business
incentive structure that is optimized to attract back to each for their own
use, under unified business terms and conditions, the improved, derivative
and/or combined works that anyone may create for distribution. Treasury
Board Secretariat further wishes to provide reasonable protection to
Canadian taxpayers from inadvertently paying for the same Foreground
Information more than once. Therefore the following licenses are applied to
ProjectName software, text and graphics:

   Descriptive Text and Architectural Graphics that are created for the
ProjectName Project are for publication and distribution under the Version
1.2 of the [GNU Free Documentation License](www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) 
(GNU-FDL).
   Programming Code of the ProjectName Project is for publication and
distribution under Version 2 the [GNU General Public License](www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html)
 (GNU-GPL).
   Work that Is Both Programming Code and Descriptive, such as descriptive
comments in the source code that are not executable, as well as source-code
samples that are used in ProjectName documentation, are to be published and
distributed dual-licensed under both the FDL and the GPL.

Alternate Licensing by the Original Copyright Holder. Copyright Holders of
Foreground Information used in the ProjectName Project each retain the
right to also use the work for their own purposes, and to distribute it
through any other channel under any licenses they choose. The alternate
licensing rights of each Contractor or Sub-Contractor in their own
Foreground Information do not extend to the combined or derivative work of
multiple copyright holders.

Alternate Licensing by Government of Canada as the Joint Copyright
Assignee. The Government of Canada is provided the authority, at its sole
discretion, to re-license the ProjectName software, text, or graphics in
whole or in part. This is because each Contractor and Sub-Contractor
contributing to the ProjectName Project will have assigned unrestricted
joint copyight to the Government of Canada, and will have waived any
exclusive moral rights they may individually have in the Foreground
Information. The Government of Canada intends only to exercise this
re-licensing authority when it deems the public interest can be better
served by:

   Dual licensing ProjectName software, in whole or in part, under the
Eclipse Public License (EPL), Version 1, in addition to the GNU-GPL;
   Re-licensing the ProjectName software, text, or graphics in whole or in
part, under later versions of any of the above mentioned licenses.

The Parties acknowledge that if a new version of a license is released that
gives additional permissions, those permissions will be available to all;
but if the new version of a license has a tighter requirement, it will not
restrict use of the current version of the program, because the work can
still be used under original license version. Users will always be
permitted to use or modify ProjectName software, text, or graphics
according to the terms of the license versions identified here, even after
later versions of the licenses are available.
Redistribution of the ProjectName Software, and its Derivative or Combined
Works.

   When ProjectName software or its derivative or combined works are
licensed under the GNU-GPL, the Parties acknowledge that the software or
its derivative or combined works can be redistributed by anyone, in whole
or in part, in the following contexts:
   Within any other program that is also licensed under the GNU-GPL;
   Alongside software that is under licenses other than the GNU-GPL, so
long as the other software communicates at ?arms length? with ProjectName
program, and is not combined in a way that makes them effectively a single
program.
   The client will provide detailed guidelines on the Treasury Board
Secretariat's (business and technology) architectural view of the
redistribution provisions of the GNU-GPL.
   When ProjectName software or its derivative or combined works are
licensed under the EPL, the Parties acknowledge that the software or its
derivative or combined works can be redistributed by anyone, in whole or in
part, in the following contexts:
   Within any other file that is also licensed under the EPL;
   Alongside software that is under licenses other than the EPL, so long
as the other software communicates at ?arms length? with ProjectName files,
and is not combined in a way that makes them effectively a single
executable file. The EPL permits combining ProjectName source code files
directly with other files under other licenses within the same program.
   The client will provide detailed guidelines on the Treasury Board
Secretariat's (business and technology) architectural view of the
redistribution provisions of the EPL.

Externally-Acquired Software. The terms and conditions of externally
acquired software that is used to create and operate the ProjectName
Reference Implementation shall be read and respected by each team member:

   PostgreSQL is distributed by the [PostgreSQL Global Development Group
under the BSD License](www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.php)
   R and R-Project are distributed by the R Foundation under the [GNU
General Public License](www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html)
   PHP is distributed by the PHP Group under the [PHP License](www.opensource.org/licenses/php)
   Perl is distribued by O'Reilly Media under the [Perl Artistic License](www.perl.com/pub/a/language/misc/artistic.html
)

**Trade Name**: The trade name ProjectName is owned by the Government of
Canada, and it cannot be used in the trade names of derivative works
without the written permission of the ProjectName Project Manager on behalf
of the Government of Canada.

**Limitation of Liability**: In accordance with the TBS ?Policy on Decision
Making in Limiting Contractor Liability in Crown Procurement Contracts?
(Annex 4, Model 2), the Parties agree that given the Government of Canada's
business objective of facilitating knowledge-sharing and
inter-organizational learning, Canadian taxpayers are best served by each
Party accepting its own individual responsibility for due diligence in
managing financial, privacy, security, and technical performance. The
Parties acknowledge that all Foreground Information under the
abovementioned licenses is provided by Suppliers on an ?as is? basis. The
present agreement does NOT include supply by the Contractor or
Sub-Contractor of financial services (such such as warranties, insurance,
and indemnifications) to the Government of Canada, directly, indirectly or
by implication.
**[Reference](http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pubs_pol/dcgpubs/Contracting/dmlc-pdlr-PR_e.asp?printable=True
)**

Right or Authorization to Contribute. Suppliers shall only make
Contributions to the ProjectName Project that they and the Government of
Canada have clear rights or authorizations to distribute under the
ProjectName Project's licenses. In addition to Foreground Information, the
contributions may include Third Party Reusable Information that has been
properly licensed by its copyright holder for re-use and re-distribution
under terms and conditions that are compatible with the ProjectName
Project's licenses. The sources and licenses of the Third Party Reusable
Information must be identified as an essential part of each Supplier's
Contribution to the ProjectName Project. Suppliers shall advise the
ProjectName Project Manager immediately in writing of any issues or
uncertainties regarding appropriate use or distribution.
